1.1. Display the name of the current user
whoami


1.2. Get basic information about the operating system
uname
Using the -a option prints all the system information.
uname -a


1.3. Obtain the user and group identity information
id


1.4 Get available disk space
df
The df command is used to display available disk space.


This command will display available disk space in 512-byte blocks. To get available disk space in a "human-readable" format, enter:
df -h


1.5. View currently running processes
ps
The ps command lists each process that is currently running and its PID (process id).

By using the -e option, you can display all of the processes running on the system. The includes processes owned by other users.
ps -e


1.6. Get information on the running processes and system resources
top
The top or "table of processes" command provides a dynamic, real-time view of your system.

If you want to exit automatically after a specified number of repetitions, use the -n option as follows:
top -n 10

You can press the following keys with Shift while top is running to sort the table:

Key	Sorts by
m	Memory Usage
p	CPU Usage
n	Process ID (PID)
t	Running Time


1.7. Display Messages
echo
The echo command displays the given text on the screen. For example, entering:
echo "Welcome to the linux lab"

These special characters help you better format your output:

Special Character	Effect
\n	Start a new line
\t	Insert a tab
Use the -e option of the echo command when working with special characters. For example:
echo -e "This will be printed \nin two lines"


.8. Display date and time
date
The date command displays the current date and time.

It has several options which allow you to display the current date and time in different formats.
example: 
date "+%T"

Specifier	Explanation
%d	Displays the day of the month (01 to 31)
%h	Displays the abbreviated month name (Jan to Dec)
%m	Displays the month of year (01 to 12)
%Y	Displays the four-digit year
%T	Displays the time in 24 hour format as HH:MM:SS
%H	Displays the hour


1.9. View the Reference Manual For a Command
man
The man command displays the user manual for any command that you provide as its argument.

For example, to see the manual page for the ls command, enter:
man ls

You will sometimes encounter a command that does not have a man page avaible on your system. To see all available man pages with a brief description of each command, enter:
man -k .